Acoustic backscatter processing
in GLOBE: an open-source
software for echo sounder data
analysis
C. Poncelet*, A. Saunier, A. Gaillot, G. Billant and L. Berger
Underwater Acoustics Laboratory, DFO/NSE/ASTI, Institut Français de Recherche pour l ’Exploitation de
la Mer (Ifremer), Plouzané, France
In order to meet the needs of a wide scienti ﬁc community and take advantage of
large echo sounder datasets collected at sea, Ifremer has developed GLOBE
(GLobal Oceanographic Bathymetry Explorer), an open-source software
program that integrates tools for bathymetry, water column, and now
advanced sea ﬂoor backscatter processing. GLOBE follows standardized
formats and methodologies, including the International Council For the
Exploration of the Sea (ICES) SONAR-netCDF4 standard and the Geohab
Backscatter Working Group (BSWG) recommendations, ensuring
interoperability and reproducibility. GLOBE provides a comprehensive 3D
georeferenced environment for visualizing and analyzing echo sounder data
by merging datasets acquired on different platforms at various spatial and
temporal scales. The applicability of GLOBE software for sea ﬂoor backscatter
processing is presented and compared with that of existing tools. Its use is
illustrated with a dataset of the multibeam water column and seaﬂoor backscatter
acquired by a research vessel and an underwater vehicle of the French
Oceanographic Fleet (FOF) in the Tyrrhenian Sea.
KEYWORDS
echo sounder, water column, acoustic backscatter, bathymetry, oceanography, open-
source software
1 Introduction
The use of echo sounder technology aboard scienti ﬁc research vessels, underwater
vehicles, and seaﬂoor observatories is essential for studying vast regions of the sea ﬂoor and
the water column for a variety of oceanographic applications. These sensors can be divided
into two categories: 1) multibeam echo sounders (MBES), primarily designed for
bathymetric applications, and 2) quantitative calibrated echo sounders (also called a
scientiﬁc echo sounder by the manufacturer Kongsberg), primarily designed for
assessing backscattering quantities in the water column. They provide crucial insights
into sea ﬂoor morphology, sediment properties, water column dynamics, and aquatic
ecosystem resources. Each sensor is speci ﬁcally designed to capture distinct acoustic
properties of the marine environment, and dedicated tools have been developed by
different communities for comprehensive marine research.
This paper introduces GLobal Oceanographic Bathymetry Explorer (GLOBE) as a
unique open-source software solution developed by Ifremer and the French Oceanographic
Fleet (FOF). GLOBE offers two key capabilities.
OPEN ACCESS
EDITED BY
Craig John Brown,
Dalhousie University, Canada
REVIEWED BY
Lukasz Janowski,
Gdynia Maritime University, Poland
Mashkoor Malik,
National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA), United States
*CORRESPONDENCE
C. Poncelet,
cyrille.poncelet@ifremer.fr
RECEIVED 10 February 2025
ACCEPTED 30 May 2025
PUBLISHED 08 July 2025
CORRECTED 07 October 2025
CITATION
Poncelet C, Saunier A, Gaillot A, Billant G and
Berger L (2025) Acoustic backscatter
processing in GLOBE: an open-source software
for echo sounder data analysis.
Front. Remote Sens. 6:1574129.
doi: 10.3389/frsen.2025.1574129
COPYRIGHT
© 2025 Poncelet, Saunier, Gaillot, Billant and
Berger. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other forums is
permitted, provided the original author(s) and
the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the
original publication in this journal is cited, in
accordance with accepted academic practice.
No use, distribution or reproduction is
permitted which does not comply with these
terms.
Frontiers in Remote Sensing frontiersin.org01
TYPE Technology and Code
PUBLISHED 08 July 2025
DOI 10.3389/frsen.2025.15741291) GLOBE was primarily designed to provide a full suite of tools
for bathymetry-related processing, including support for
advanced sea ﬂoor backscatter processing and enabling
detailed sea ﬂoor characterization,
2) GLOBE is designed to integrate different kinds of datasets into
a uni ﬁed 3D georeferenced environment for enhancing
seaﬂoor analysis with water column backscatter data.
GLOBE enables researchers to seamlessly visualize the sea ﬂoor
and the water column features and to combine data with
georeferenced in situ measurements from other sensors. GLOBE
is used in research programs aiming at monitoring biological and
physical processes and helps to create a comprehensive picture of the
ocean environment on a single platform.
This article provides an overview of GLOBE water column
backscatter capabilities and offers a deeper look at sea ﬂoor
backscatter processing and its potential contribution to the
GeoHab Backscatter Working Group ( Backscatter Working
Group (BSWG), 2025 ; Lurton et al., 2015 )a sa n
implementation of the Open Bac kscatter Toolchain project
(Masetti et al., 2020 ) improving the consistency, transparency,
and reproducibility of sea ﬂoor backscatter data products. The
article presents results fr om both water column and sea ﬂoor
using GLOBE ’s backscatter processi ng tools using datasets
acquired by state-of-the-art de ep-sea vehicles and research
vessels of the FOF. These results illustrate how GLOBE helps
end users manage data overload th rough dedicated visualization
t o o l sw i t ha na n a l y s i se x a m p l e .
1.1 Rationale for developing an open-
source platform
In the ﬁeld of marine science and oceanographic research, the
availability and interoperability of advanced data processing tools
are critical for addressing complex scienti ﬁc questions and
managing marine environments effectively. For decades, Ifremer
has been developing its own processing software for echo sounders
installed on oceanographic vessels. This decision was driven by two
key factors: ﬁrst, when integrating new generations of equipment, no
dedicated software was available for data processing; and second,
developing in-house solutions provides greater control over data
processing, fosters innovation, enables research linked to new
observational capabilities, and strengthens user support within
the scienti ﬁc community.
With the establishment of the FOF operated by Ifremer in 2018,
this approach has been maintained: continuing to develop and
provide these processing tools not only to FOF users but also to
the broader oceanographic community. As part of this commitment,
GLOBE software is released under the GNU Lesser General Public
License version 3 (LGPLv3). The terms of the LGPLv3 license ensure
free access to the software by mandating source code availability and
freedom of use. The license encourages redistribution through
copyleft provisions, requiring modi ﬁcations to be shared under
the same license. This fosters community contributions and
collaborative development, allowing scientists and end-users to
obtain a free and accessible solution for processing and analyzing
their data. The LGPLv3 also allows linking with proprietary
software, promoting wider adoption while protecting open-source
principles.
1.2 Review of software used for processing
echo sounder data
Software development for processing echo sounder data has seen
signiﬁcant progress in recent years. Commercial bathymetric
software packages predominantly focus on hydrographic survey
processing. While most of these packages can process sea ﬂoor
backscatter data, many do not disclose their processing pipeline,
and large differences can be observed between the results produced
by these different tools when used with the same dataset, as detailed
by Malik et al. (2019) . Water column data, when available, are often
limited to quality control for bathymetry. However, vendors like
Teledyne Geospatial, BeamworX, Xylem, and QPS offer robust tools
for bathymetry and provide support for backscatter and water
column visualization ( Table 1 ).
Software tools such as Echoview, LSSS, and ESP3 are notable for
their capabilities in applying calibration to raw echo sounder data,
target detection, and classiﬁcation. While Echoview stands out for its
broad spectrum of sensor input compatibility, most of the tools
primarily cater to water column calibrated echo sounders. The tools
listed in Table 2 are predominantly designed for ﬁshery acoustic data
processing.
Unlike tools dedicated to a single family of sensors, GLOBE
provides a uni ﬁed open-source platform for visualizing and
processing a wide variety of different echo sounder data types,
including bathymetry, water column, and sea ﬂoor backscatter
product generation.
2 Materials and methods
Echo sounders are the main sensors that can be displayed in
GLOBE, with the software designed to offer extensible tools for the
display and processing within a single 3D virtual environment,
providing a platform within which to handle most of the data
acquired during oceanographic surveys on an FOF vessel.
GLOBE was primarily designed as a bathymetry processing tool
for FOF users, replacing Ifremer ’s Caraibes software ( Le Gal and
Edy, 1997). It implements a set of data processing methods allowing
classical correction on bathymetric MBES sounder data and the
creation of bathymetry products. Bathymetry processing is the ﬁrst
mandatory step as input data to the sea ﬂoor backscatter processing
workﬂow detailed in this article, although a detailed description of
bathymetry processing is out of the scope of this article. Regarding
water column backscatter, GLOBE allows computing and displaying
water column products on dedicated 2D views or in the centralized
geographic view where all datasets can be displayed and
georeferenced in a virtual globe.
2.1 A common format for echo sounder data
GLOBE made the choice to convert bathymetric multibeam
echo sounder ﬁles recorded by the manufacturer ’s software in their
Frontiers in Remote Sensing frontiersin.org02
Poncelet et al. 10.3389/frsen.2025.1574129own data format (e.g., .all or .kmall ﬁle format for the Kongsberg
bathymetry sounder, .s7k for Reson bathymetry sounders) to a
standard common format that can be used as a working format
to store processing result and metadata. In 2018, a working group of
the International Council For the Exploration of the Sea (ICES)
posted a report on a convention named SONAR-netCFD4
(Macaulay and Peña, 2018 ) for the storage of sonar data in
netCDF4-formatted ﬁles with an initial focus on omni-directional
sonars and allowing for a description of quantitative echo sounders.
The intention for this format is to provide a well-founded
TABLE 1 Bathymetry processing software. Bathymetry, sea ﬂoor backscatter processing, and water column capacities are reported according to their
respective online documentation and their licensing models.
Software Developer Bathymetry
processing
Seaﬂoor
backscatter
processing
Water column License
Caris Hips and SIPS
(accessed 2024)
Teledyne Geospatial Yes Yes Yes, mainly as a QC
for bathymetry
Commercial
licence
MB-System, (accessed
2024)
MBari Yes No, sidescan mainly No Open-source:
GPL license
Hypack product (accessed
2025)
Xylem Yes Yes, Geocoder Yes, mainly as QC for
bathymetry
Commercial
license
QPS Suite Fledermaus,
FMGT, (accessed 2025)
QPS Yes Yes, Geocoder Yes FM Midwater
and Fledermaus
Commercial
license
BeamworX (accessed 2024) Beamworks Yes Yes, method unknown Unknown Commercial
license
Espresso ( Schimel et al.,
2024)
Alexandre Schimel (The Geological
Survey of Norway,
alexandre.schimel@ngu.no)
Yoann Ladroit (Kongsberg
Discovery)
Shyam Chand (The Geological
Survey of Norway)
No No Yes Open-source:
MIT License
TABLE 2 Calibrated water column dedicated software detailing the supported input sensors, primary applications, and licensing models.
Software Developer Input sensors Target License
Echoview Echoview Pty Ltd.,
Australia
Single-beam and wideband echo
sounder
MBES omni-directional sonar
ADCP
Hydroacoustic data processing Commercial
LSSS ( Korneliussen
et al., 2006 )
MAREC-IMR, Norway Single-beam and wideband echo
sounder (Kongsberg/Simrad) omni-
directional sonar (Kongsberg/Simrad)
MBES MS70 (Kongsberg/Simrad)
Stock assessment Transitioning to open source ( https://www.
norceresearch.no/en/news/our-acoustic-
analysis-system-for-ﬁsh-is-becoming-open-
source)
PyEcholab ( Wall
et al., 2018 )
NOAA/NMFS, US Single-beam and wideband echo
sounder
Python toolkit for EK80/
ME70 Kongsberg sonar system
Open source: MIT
Echopype ( Lee
et al., 2024 )
founder: APL,
University of
Washington, US
Single-beam and wideband echo
sounder (Kongsberg/Simrad, AZFP
echo sounder)
ADCP (beta)
Python framework for
processing a large amount of
data
Open source: Apache 2.0
MatEcho ( Perrot
et al., 2018 )
IRD, France Single-beam and wideband echo
sounder (Kongsberg/Simrad, AZFP
echo sounder)
MBES
Processing ﬁshery acoustic data Unde ﬁned, code available
ESP3 (Ladroit et al.,
2020)
NIWA, New Zealand Single-beam and wideband echo
sounder (Kongsberg/Simrad, AZFP
echo sounder)
MBES ME70
Visualizing and processing
ﬁshery acoustics data
Open source: MIT
Movies3D ( Trenkel
et al., 2009 )
Ifremer, France Single-beam and wideband echo
sounder in HAC or SONAR-netCDF
format
MBES ME70 in HAC or SONAR-
netCDF format
Visualizing and processing
calibrated water column
acoustics data
Open source: LGPLv3
Frontiers in Remote Sensing frontiersin.org03
Poncelet et al. 10.3389/frsen.2025.1574129convention that is supported by multiple sonar systems and multiple
sonar analysis software packages, with the aim of facilitating the
quantitative use of sonar data for research and survey purposes.
Version 2 of the format published in 2022 considers more types of
sounders, including sounders having separate emitting and receiving
transducers, such as multibeam bathymetry echo sounders, and even
acoustic Doppler current proﬁler (ADCP) sounders with a dedicated
group for water current values.
GLOBE uses as its working format an extension to the SONAR-
netCDF4 labeled XSF (as eXtended SONAR-netCDF Format). This
extension allows storing the bathymetry and sea ﬂoor backscatter
data through dedicated subgroups. GLOBE embeds XSF converters
for the bathymetry echo sounders available on the FOF vessels
(namely, Reson Seabat 7150, 7111, 7125, and most of the Kongsberg
EM mapping echo sounders). Thanks to this format, GLOBE can
share its functionality with systems using the SONAR-netCDF4 as a
common description format at no cost. For example, GLOBE can
display with the same tools water column content not only from
bathymetric multibeam echo sounders but also from Kongsberg and
Furuno quantitative single-beam echo sounders complying with this
format (in continuous wave (CW) mode) for displaying water
column backscatter.
2.2 Water column feature
GLOBE can read water column data from any echo sounder in a
format compliant with SONAR-netCDF4 v2.0 and display the water
column in several ways for single-beam or multibeam sonar systems.
However, managing water column data presents signi ﬁcant
challenges. More speci ﬁcally, these data are cumbersome to store
and process due to their large size, which is often several orders of
magnitude greater than bathymetry and sea ﬂoor backscatter data.
This size discrepancy arises from the fact that while the sea ﬂoor is
represented by values in a two-dimensional ping and beam
dimension, water column data incorporates a third dimension
representing the range from the echo sounder to the sea ﬂoor.
This additional dimension dramatically increases the size of the
dataset and introduces new challenges for the visualization and
interpretation of such multidimensional data.
To address this challenge, dimensionality reduction is available
through dedicated views and ﬁlters. Water column data can be
displayed ping per ping in either a dedicated 2D fan display
(Figure 1A , up) or as a set of individual echoes displayed in 3D
with respect to the beams opening of the echo sounders
(Figure 1A , down).
FIGURE 1
Water column backscatter from UlyX EM2040 data of dive #10. (A) Focus on the gas plumes area, with three water column echograms from three
different survey lines, two at a constant altitude of 60 m above the sea ﬂoor and 300 kHz (red navigation lines), and one at 6 m altitude and 400 kHz (blue
navigation line). Above, the same echograms are displayed in 2D views and synchronized with the geographic view. (B) Same view as (A), but with side-
lobe ﬁltering applied to water column backscatter data, showing the bene ﬁts of synchronization between views in the application: gas plumes are
clearly highlighted in every view. (C) Vertical slices showing gas plumes in the middle of the area. (D) Volume backscatter water column data display,
showing 400 pings from each 60-m altitude line with side-lobe ﬁltering applied. This clearly shows that gas plumes are rooted in pockmarks visible on
shaded bathymetry. Basemaps (A–C) UlyX EM2040 backscatter computed with GLOBE software (1 m resolution), (D) Atalante EM122 backscatter
computed with GLOBE software (30 m resolution).
Frontiers in Remote Sensing frontiersin.org04
Poncelet et al. 10.3389/frsen.2025.1574129Water column data can be stacked using tools available to create
water column products, allowing for rapid, broad-scale visualization
of georeferenced water-column features, as shown in Figure 1C .
Water column stacking, dedicated to multibeam echo sounder
data, is highly conﬁgurable (e.g., number of stacks, surface reference,
ﬁlters, and side-lobe removal) and is computed as the mean linear
values of echoes in the water column with respect to their geographic
location. The stacking algorithm considers the real geolocation of
each echo and is identical to the “vertically echo-integrated view ”
algorithm used by the Espresso software ( Schimel et al., 2024 ).
Stacks can be created (1) vertically along and parallel to the ship ’s
track or (2) horizontally as a projection of the water column with
respect to a reference surface. For vertical stacking, a set of vertical
surfaces is de ﬁned along a ship ’s track with a regular across-track
spacing. For horizontal stacking, the set of regularly spaced surfaces
is deﬁned relative to the sea surface or the sea ﬂoor. In both cases, all
water column echoes are georeferenced, ﬁlters are optionally
applied, and the contribution of each echo to the surface pixels is
assessed by computing its projection vector to the nearest surface.
The algorithm then computes the mean linear values of all
contributing echoes to each surface pixel. For vertical stacking,
the projection vector follows the vertical axis, whereas for
horizontal stacking, the projection vector is horizontal,
perpendicular to the nearest track position. To our knowledge,
this algorithm is not currently implemented in any of the few
commercial software programs available for visualizing
multibeam water column data, especially allowing such stacking
and display in a multipurpose geographic 3D environment.
All water column displays can be enhanced with a set of pre-
processing algorithms to remove or ﬁlter unwanted features or noise
that may otherwise increase scene complexity. The parameters
combined with multiple ping displays bring the capacity to
FIGURE 2
Representation of the GLOBE processing workﬂow: On the left side, the indicative bathymetry processing workﬂow and its outputs are shown: a raw
ﬁle converted to XSF format, containing the results of the bathymetry process, along with its associated gridded product generated for bathymetry dat a.
These outputs are then used on the right side for the subsequent steps of seaﬂoor backscatter processing, which can be performed using either the static
or the dynamic method. Matching levels BL0 to BL4 are indicated at their corresponding steps in the work ﬂow.
Frontiers in Remote Sensing frontiersin.org05
Poncelet et al. 10.3389/frsen.2025.1574129display 3D complex features in a water column scene, as illustrated
in Figure 1D .
One of the next steps in water column analysis involves spatial
and temporal feature labeling. GLOBE includes geo-picking
capabilities, allowing users to record the location in space and
time of the point of interest in the water column. The geo-
picking can be augmented with metadata such as typology and
conﬁdence of classiﬁcation, saved in a *.csv ﬁle format, and used for
further analysis such as geostatistical algorithms or deep learning
experiments similar to Perret et al. (2025) .
2.3 Sea ﬂoor backscatter data
processing work ﬂow
Getting backscatter strength from the sea ﬂoor is not a
straightforward operation and requires successive processing
steps to achieve comparable and reproducible results. The various
stages are identi ﬁed in the standard work ﬂow detailed in Schimel
et al. (2018) , and the intermediate backscatter levels obtained are
named BL
0 through BL 4. GLOBE ’s backscatter processing follows
this work ﬂow and is directly inspired by the SonarScope software
formerly designed at Ifremer to offer an improved estimation of BS
computed by the sounder manufacturer. This work ﬂow,
summarized in Figure 2 , is fully integrated and simpli ﬁed as
much as possible so that it can be accessible to scientists without
deep expertise in acoustics or sonar systems. GLOBE offers two
forms of seaﬂoor backscatter processing: 1) static processing, similar
to the one of SonarScope, and 2) dynamic processing. The static
method consists of computing angular response curves on a selected
part of input ﬁles, which might be clipped by a geographic mask. The
angular response curves are then used to compensate the angular
dependency of the backscatter level of the entire ﬁles before
gridding. The dynamic method applies the same operations but
in a temporal manner, with angular response curves being computed
on a sliding window over each swath of MBES data. The backscatter
processing workﬂow is based on the XSF standard format but uses
vendor-speciﬁc information. Consequently, only FOF echo
sounders are currently fully supported.
2.3.1 BL 0 raw data decoding and georeferencing
Several methods exist to compute a backscatter value per beam
from raw ﬁles ( Malik et al., 2019 ). Per-beam sea ﬂoor backscatter
values are either retrieved directly from the vendor raw ﬁle
(Kongsberg systems) or computed from raw snippets samples as
in Reson systems. All these data are converted by GLOBE and stored
in the pivot SONAR-netCDF4 format, used by GLOBE backscatter
processing as its working format. When per-beam values are
computed by GLOBE, snippets are converted to a ping-beam 2D
data matrix through a simple mean in amplitude linear space
(Equation 1 ) and associated to the corresponding beam-sounding
geographic position.
FIGURE 3
GLOBE and SonarScope BL 0 comparison for the EM302 BSIP dataset: mean data along pings for BL 0 and the differences between the two
software packages.
Frontiers in Remote Sensing frontiersin.org06
Poncelet et al. 10.3389/frsen.2025.1574129BS ping, beam() /equals 20 log mean 10BSsnippets ping,beam()
20()() (1)
2.3.2 BL 1 correction for gains applied in reception
(Kongsberg example)
The ﬁrst processing step is to remove vendor-speci ﬁc
compensations. Depending on MBES manufacturers, real-time
recorded BS data might be compensated to cope with incidence
angle dependence. This compensation should be removed to retrieve
uncompensated backscatter values ( Hammerstad, 2000 ).
In the case of Kongsberg sounders, two terms are removed from
BS, corresponding to specular and Lambert law correction.
ampSI /equals BS − 20 log
rn
r()
− 1 −
/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext /radicaltpext
r − rn() / rco − rn()
√
() *ΔBS rn ≤ r < rco
0 r ≥ rco
⎧⎨
⎩ (2)
With
ΔBS: BSO − BSN
BSO: Mean backscattering coefficient for the
oblique incidence region
BSN: Mean backscattering coefficient near normal incidence
rn: range at the normal incidence
rco /equals rn/ cos θco
θco: The crossover angle
Equation 2 is used to retrieve raw BS from Kongsberg
recorded snippets.
In the case of Reson MBES (7,150/7,125), no real-time
compensation is applied, so raw values from the snippets are
used directly. However, without any details about how the
insoniﬁed area is estimated, the next processing step is skipped,
and consequently, we assume a worse correction.
The second processing step is to remove the vendor-speci ﬁc
insoniﬁed area. Bottom target strength (BTS) is approximated from
the previously computed BS using the formula ( Equation 3 ) from
Lurton et al. (2015) ,
BTS /equals BS + 10logA (3)
where A is the target insoni ﬁed area as estimated in real time,
assuming that the bottom is perfectly ﬂat for the whole swath and
perpendicular to the shortest range, called range to normal incidence
rn ( Equation 4 ).
A /equals A
N r <
/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext
r2
n + cTp
2Ωrx
()
2√
AO otherwise
⎧⎪⎪
⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎩
A
N /equals ΩrxΩtxr2
AO /equals cTp
2
/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext
1 − r2
n/r2
√ Ωtxr (4)
Ωtx: transmit beam opening
FIGURE 4
GLOBE and SonarScope incidence angles. From left to right: (A) SonarScope incidence angles, (B) absolute values of SonarScope incidence angles,
(C) GLOBE incidence angles, and (D) differences between SonarScope absolute values and GLOBE.
Frontiers in Remote Sensing frontiersin.org07
Poncelet et al. 10.3389/frsen.2025.1574129Ωrx: receive beam opening
c: sound celerity
Tp: pulse length
This estimation should be removed to retrieve an estimation
without vendor compensation. At the end of this stage, assuming no
correction on vendor computed transmission losses, the backscatter
level is the level received at the transducer face prior to any
application of gain follow and noted BL
1 in the backscatter level
notation ( Schimel et al., 2018 ).
2.3.3 Reestimation of the insoni ﬁed area
Given beam pointing angles, sound velocity pro ﬁles, and slopes
from a processed bathymetry digital terrain model (DTM), full
seaﬂoor incidence angles ( θ
i) between the incident ray and the
seaﬂoor normal are computed for each detection point. The
projections of these vectors onto the vertical plane, taken in the
across-track and along-track directions, yield the across-track
incidence angle θ
iy and the along-track incidence angle ( θix),
respectively. The orientation of the incidence plane normal
relative to the across axis gives us the sea ﬂoor aspect angle ( θia).
The insoniﬁed area is either limited by the pulse length (normal
incidence) or by beam width (oblique incidence), and the minimum
of these two scenarios is retained ( Equation 5 ).
A
N /equals ΩrxΩtxr2
cos θix cos θiy
Ao /equals cTp
2 sin θi
r
/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext/radicaltpext
Ωtx sin θia() 2 + Ωrx cos θia() 2
√
A /equals min A N,A O() (5)
It is assumed that these formulas are simpli ﬁed versions of the
real areas and are built by generalizing the previous ones to take into
account sea ﬂoor slopes in both directions and the tilt angle of the
sensor ( Hammerstad, 2000 ; Lurton et al., 2015 , Equation 25)
We have now Equation 6 .
BL
2 /equals BL1 − 10logA (6)
2.3.4 Angular response analysis
The next step is to determine and remove the angular response
of the transducers and the sea ﬂoor. To achieve this, the current
methodology is statistical and aims at separating the contributions of
the transducer (beam pattern and source level) from the
contribution of the sea ﬂoor type and geomorphology. The main
problem to be solved here is that the two phenomena are entangled:
the variation of the seabed backscattering strength, with the
incidence angle, disturbs the measurement of the beam patterns,
which vary with the transmission angles.
The static method relies on statistics computed on the largest
possible amount of data. Given this set of data, ping-beam detections
are sorted by incidence angle to apply a mean/median in linear units
on backscatter values with bins of 1
° that lead to a statistical model of
BS response by incidence (meanBSincidence). The values of this model
FIGURE 5
GLOBE and SonarScope BL 3 comparison for the EM302 BSIP dataset: mean data along pings for BL 3 and the differences between the two
software packages.
Frontiers in Remote Sensing frontiersin.org08
Poncelet et al. 10.3389/frsen.2025.1574129FIGURE 6
GLOBE and SonarScope BL 3 comparison for the EM302 BSIP dataset.
FIGURE 7
ULYXDEMO24 MBES digital terrain models of processed data: (A) Atalante EM122 data (30 m resolution) and UlyX EM2040 data and (B) dive #10 in
propeller basin (1 m resolution). Basemaps: (A) EMODnet Bathymetry and (B) Atalante EM122 shaded DTM.
Frontiers in Remote Sensing frontiersin.org09
Poncelet et al. 10.3389/frsen.2025.1574129are then removed from the BS level by detection to get the residual
BS, deﬁned as the difference between the actual BS value and the BS
model by incidence angle. Applying the same statistics by
transmission angle, we obtain a residual BS model by
transmission ( meanBS
residual). The transmission angle is
considered to be the beam-pointing angle expressed in the vessel
referential. The more variety and combinations we have in data
between angles of incidence and transmission, the more the models
will be decorrelated from each other, and the residual BS model will
be close to a beam pattern estimation.
As the exact characteristics of each hardware and acquisition
mode are not known or documented, the algorithm computes these
statistics by acquisition mode, by emission sector, and by reception
antenna. The analysis data are then written in a netCDF ﬁle with the
extension “bsar.nc” for backscatter angular response . The curves
contained in the bsar net.CDF ﬁle can be edited in GLOBE for
quality control and outlier ﬁltering. A set of tools for ﬁltering and/or
ﬁtting these data to a parametric mathematical model is planned for
future development. Because data used in this step depend on
seaﬂoor diversity, the algorithm considers a geographic mask to
restrict the model to a speci ﬁc part of the data, carefully chosen
by the user.
The dynamic method approach consists of computing the same
statistics but in a time-varying manner. For a given swath, all data
enclosed in a temporal window around it and sharing the same
acquisition mode are considered to build a speci ﬁc model for that
swath. For each swath, the backscatter reference level is also
dynamically computed, considering BS levels in the window
restricted to a user-de ﬁned range of incidence angles. BS level
offsets between acquisition modes, mainly due to variations in
source level, are estimated from these reference levels by
minimizing variations around acquisition mode changes. This
information is used to ensure the continuity of BS levels in
the next step.
2.3.5 Angular dependence removal
The static angle dependence removal is done through the
Backscatter angular renormalization process. From BL 2 data and
given a BS model ﬁle generated in the previo us step, the backscatter
level without any angular dependency is computed with (Equation 7).
BL4 /equals BL2 − meanBSincidence θi() − meanBSresidual θt() + BSref (7)
BSref is a user-de ﬁned reference level that corresponds to the mean
output reference level. It defaults to the mean BS level over all
incidence angles of the BS model.
The BS model is purely statistical and includes several physical
contributions that prevent the possibility of a backscatter level BL
3
computation at that time. Such computation will be considered in
FIGURE 8
Illustration of geographic visualization capabilities for linking sea ﬂoor and water column backscatter observations. (A) Two water column
backscatter echograms and the dynamically normalized sea ﬂoor backscatter mosaic (10 cm cell size), all from UlyX EM2040 data from dive 10 (400 kHz,
6 m altitude). (B) Orthophotomosaic superimposed on the backscatter mosaic. Manually selected gas plume feet are displayed as red spheres. It
emphasizes the link between the area of weak sea ﬂoor backscatter visible in the pockmark trough, the gas plumes observed in the water column
backscatter echograms above, and the blue areas on the orthophotomosaic corresponding to bacterial mats. The UlyX track is shown as red lines. Base
maps: UlyX EM2040 sea ﬂoor backscatter mosaic (70 m altitude, 1 m cell size).
Frontiers in Remote Sensing frontiersin.org10
Poncelet et al. 10.3389/frsen.2025.1574129future development by adding a calibration step that uses third-
party equipment, like data from a calibrated single-beam echo
sounder. Through this approach, it is possible to retrieve absolute
meanBS
incidence(θi) and BSref values, fully separate contributions of
seaﬂoor backscattering strength variation with incidence from beam
pattern variation with transmission angles, and ﬁnally obtain an
absolute response of the sea ﬂoor independently from equipment
characteristics ( Eleftherakis et al., 2018 ).
The dynamic method, called the Backscatter sliding angular
renormalization process, extends the static method by computing
the model and applying correction along a temporal sliding window.
Equation 7 becomes ( Equation 8 ):
BL
4 /equals BL2 − meanBSincidence θi,t() − meanBSresidual θt,t()
− meanBSoffset mode() + meanBSref t() (8)
This temporal approach enables managing BS level gaps
observed between acquisition modes. This feature is not yet
available with the static method but could be proposed as a
future improvement.
2.3.6 Export and mosaicking
The BL4 is ﬁnally saved in source SONAR-netCDF4ﬁles (XSF). It
overwrites previous raw backscatter values, and additional metadata are
added to ﬂag the ﬁle as processed. While various gridding algorithms
exist ( Schimel et al., 2018 ), GLOBE employs a simple yet effective
gridding algorithm thatﬁlls the backscatter layer of the generated DTM
by computing the mean in linear units from all backscatter data within
each grid cell. The additional tool allows the remaining gaps to beﬁlled
using bilinear interpolation on valid cells.
2.4 Data description
The BSWG’s Backscatter Software Intercomparison Project (BSIP)
conducted a study on the processing methods of several software (Malik
et al., 2019 ) where SonarScope was used and compared with other
processing software. One result of the BSIP project was that software
packages diverge in a very early stage during processing and show large
differences between them. The differences in backscatter data
processing stem from varying methods used to compute a single
representative value per beam from recorded snippets. These
variations arise from (1) the choic e of statistical measure (mean or
median); (2) the selection criteria for backscatter samples (all samples
vs. a subset around the bottom detect); (3) the calculation approach
(directly averaging dB values vs. converting to linear scale before
averaging). The raw datasets used in this project are still publicly
available at https://bswg.github.io/bsip/; however, the processed
datasets from each software are no longer available. The
SonarScope/GLOBE benchmark described in the ﬁrst section of the
results in Section 3.1 uses only the ﬁrst BSIP dataset, coming from the
K o n g s b e r gE M3 0 2( 3 0k H z )o fN O A AS h i pO k e a n o sE x p l o r e r .
The second section of the study, described in Section 3.2 , uses
datasets acquired during the ULYXDEMO 2024 technical cruise
(Escartin et al., 2024 ). This marine expedition was conducted in the
Tyrrhenian Sea, on board R/V L ’Atalante, targeting areas in three
FIGURE 9
Seaﬂoor backscatter mosaic (1 m) from UlyX EM2040 data of dive #10: clockwise from top left: (A) Raw backscatter as decoded from the original. All
ﬁles use backscatter data normalized using the (B) SonarScope static method. Angular response curves are computed on the whole dataset, and red
arrows indicate incidence angle artifacts. (C) The GLOBE static method, and (D) using the GLOBE dynamic method. Basemap: Atalante EM122 shaded
bathymetry (30 m).
Frontiers in Remote Sensing frontiersin.org11
Poncelet et al. 10.3389/frsen.2025.1574129types of terrain, with test sites depths ranging from 500 m to
3,700 m: a) sedimented areas with gentle relief (e.g., abyssal
plain, Italian margin), <10
°, b) areas with relief typically <20°,c )
rugged terrain with scarps, slopes ( >30° locally), and complex
morphology. Some of these areas host hydrothermal vents and
gas plumes. Data were acquired with the Atalante ship and UlyX,
a state-of-the-art underwater vehicle tested during this technical
cruise. The R/V Atalante is equipped with EM122 and
EM710 multibeam echo sounders and surveyed all 17 sites prior
to the dives. UlyX is equipped with an EM2040 multibeam echo
sounder, a digital still camera (with two ﬂash units), a conductivity,
temperature, and depth (CTD) sensor, and several physico-chemical
sensors, including oxygen, pH, redox, magnetometers, ﬂuorimeter,
and nephelometer.
3 Results
3.1 Benchmark of sea ﬂoor backscatter
processing
The benchmark of sea ﬂoor backscatter processing uses
SonarScope as a proxy to understand how GLOBE sea ﬂoor
backscatter processing relates to the other processing software
presented in the BSIP study and replicates some of the BSIP
comparisons.
3.1.1 BL 0 comparison
The BSIP study showed that differences appeared as soon as data
were read by different tools (BL 0). There are two ways to read the
backscatter level for Kongsberg MBES data in both SonarScope and
GLOBE. The ﬁrst way is to directly read the data from beam
reﬂectivity datagrams. Raw decoding of BS values stored in the
depth XYZ 88 Kongsberg datagram is performed the same way in
both SonarScope and GLOBE and gives the same results. In such a
case, there is no difference for BL
0. The second approach uses the
snippets re ﬂectivity datagrams. Each beam re ﬂectivity can also be
computed by averaging the full amplitude time series recorded
within each beam from Seabed image 89 datagrams. Kongsberg
snippet data are compensated at acquisition to lower specular
reﬂection at the nadir and to cope with outer beam attenuation
(Lambert’s law). Each of the two software packages can suppress this
manufacturer correction to retrieve raw BS from snippets. As
illustrated in Figure 3 , data computed from snippets shows pretty
close values from both SonarScope and GLOBE (with a maximum
difference of 0.08 dB at the nadir, where the precision of the sounder
record is 0.1 dB). In such a case, we consider that BL
0 values are
almost identical, and differences are likely due to numerical
imprecision when computing and applying the manufacturer
corrections.
3.1.2 Incidence angle comparison
Incidence angles are computed both in SonarScope and GLOBE
from the same DTM. The result shown in Figure 4 highlights the
main differences between each software package. SonarScope
considers the calculated port side swath incidence angles as
negative numbers ( Figure 4A ), while GLOBE reports positive
incidence angles, regardless of the swath side ( Figure 4C ). In
order to compare the angle, the benchmark uses SonarScope ’s
absolute angles ( Figure 4B ). The GLOBE computed incidence
angles image shows a regular striped pattern along the ping
dimension, compared to SonarScope, emphasized by the
difference image ( Figure 4D ). This is because GLOBE ’s algorithm
considers the full beam incidence angle (relative to sea ﬂoor normal,
accounting for across-track and along-track angles), compared to
SonarScope, which only considers the projected incidence angle
onto the swath plane (across-track angle).
3.1.3 BL 3 comparison
BL3 (backscatter level after radiometric corrections but before
compensation for angular dependence) was computed for both
software, and the resulting mean across pings is shown in
Figure 5 . Both datasets consist of averaged snippet BS data, with
Kongsberg compensations removed and with the modi ﬁed
insoniﬁed area recomputed from in-house incidence angle
computation. The same DTM was used for both datasets to
ensure that differences in angle were not linked to differences in
bathymetry surface. The comparison shows mean differences across
all pings being less than 0.5 dB at its maximum. Ping-beam BL
3
matrices and associated differences are plotted as images in Figure 6.
The beam-wise BL3 differences show an across-track striped pattern
that is linked to the difference in incidence angles computation
explained above.
3.1.4 Benchmark evaluation
As seen in Section 2.6, GLOBE sea ﬂoor backscatter processing
retains SonarScope philosophy. Meanwhile, GLOBE differs from
SonarScope in several ways. 1) Statistical calculations are performed
via different binning strategies, leading to higher differences in
backscatter curves per incidence angle. While GLOBE ’s
implementation uses centered bins, SonarScope uses left-binned
statistics. For example, take a bin of 1 degree width at 0
°: the binned
mean will be calculated from samples in the interval [0 °:1 °] for
SonarScope, and [ −0.5°: 0.5 °] for GLOBE, resulting in slightly
different results. Binning was modi ﬁed in GLOBE for this study
to track other differences but was reverted back to its origin
afterward. If any study is to be conducted again, those differences
will increase. 2) SonarScope considers the calculated port side swath
incidence angles as negative numbers ( Malik et al., 2019 ), while
GLOBE reports positive incidence angles, regardless of the swath
side. 3) The incidence angle computation diverges between
SonarScope and GLOBE, the latter considering both along and
across angles. This results in differences between BL
3-level
computation but without any strong visual effects on the ﬁnal
backscatter product. The main result of this benchmark is that
GLOBE’s backscatter computation is equivalent to SonarScope, and
therefore, GLOBE can be directly compared to FMGT and CARIS
SIPS on this EM302 dataset.
3.2 Sea ﬂoor and water column backscatter
processing in GLOBE during a scienti ﬁc
cruise for geoscience applications
This section showcases how GLOBE functionalities can help
scientists analyze their data for scrutinizing sea ﬂoor pockmarks and
Frontiers in Remote Sensing frontiersin.org12
Poncelet et al. 10.3389/frsen.2025.1574129g a ss e e p s .T h ec h o i c eo fe x a m p l e sseeks to illustrate (a) different
kinds of bathymetry and backscatter data display to enhance
the detection of phenomena of interest in the water column or on
the sea ﬂoor; (b) sea ﬂoor backscatter processing results
for interpretation of sediment types associated with
ﬂuid emissions.
Figure 7 shows the location of UlyX dive #10 during
ULYXDEMO 2024 and the corresponding bathymetric data
acquired. Dive #10 took place over a pockmark area at 800 m
depth with already known ﬂuid seeps (RMV area/B1 gas ﬂare in
Rovere et al. (2022) ). UlyX dove 9 h over the area at two different
altitudes, 70 m (acoustic survey) and 9 m above the seabed
(optical survey). All availab le sensors were turned on, and all
acquired data can be displayed in GLOBE. Orthophotomosaic
(previously processed with Matisse ( Arnaubec et al., 2023 ),
physico-chemical sensors, and MBES data (bathymetry,
seabed, and water column backscatter) are shown in Figure 1
and Figure 8 .
Figure 1 illustrates how water column backscatter data can be
displayed in GLOBE. Water column echograms can be viewed in
either a 2D view or a 3D geographic view (Figure 1A). The two views
are temporally linked, and a slider allows the user to navigate
between pings. They also share rendering properties, such as
color palette, contrast range, opacity, and ﬁlters. The latter is
shown in Figure 1B , which is the same view as (A), but with
side-lobe ﬁltering enabled. Figure 1D shows the advantage of
using such a ﬁlter when rendering a range of ping echograms
from multiple lines. This option easily delineates each gas plume
and its connection to sea ﬂoor pockmarks. One can also slice the
backscatter water-column data volume along the horizontal or
vertical direction, as illustrated in Figure 1D , allowing quick
inspection of the dataset.
Rovere et al. (2022) mentioned that the gas plumes observed
over this area are all related to speci ﬁcs e aﬂoor morphological
features (e.g., mounds, pockmarks, and linear scarps) or sea ﬂoor
backscatter anomalies. Gas seeps, depending on their
composition, cause precipitati on of methane-derived carbonate
and/or ﬂuidized mud at the sea ﬂoor, visible as local backscatter
variations and often associated with depressions (pockmarks).
Figure 8A illustrates how GLOBE allows scientists to quickly
correlate the observed water co lumn backscatter signals (gas
plumes) with the corresponding sea ﬂoor backscatter structure
(and eventually topography) by integrating a dynamically
normalized sea ﬂoor backscatter mosaic (10 cm cell size) and
water column echograms into the same 3D georeferenced view
(all data coming from the same UlyX EM2040 dataset, 400 kHz,
6ma l t i t u d ed a t a ) .I ts h o w st h a tt h eg a sp l u m e so b s e r v e di nt w o
water column backscatter echogr ams clearly originate from low
backscatter sea ﬂoor areas visible on two corresponding
pockmark troughs. Rovere et al. (2022) state that two box
cores were collected over this area, from which subsequent
analyses revealed the presence of gas in the sediment (mainly
composed of CO
2). Figure 8B shows the orthophotomosaic
superimposed on the backscatter mosaic, with the two sources
of the gas plumes represented by red dots in Figure 8A and
Figure 8B . It highlights that the low backscatter areas of the
seaﬂoor correspond to the white –blue areas of the
orthophotomosaic, which stand out from the rest of the
surface and correspond to micro bial mats developing in areas
of active ﬂuid and/or gas out ﬂow at the sea ﬂoor.
The sea ﬂoor backscatter data were p rocessed using the static
and dynamic methods described in the previous sections. The
resulting mosaics are shown in Figure 9 ,w h e r ew ec a ns e e ,
clockwise from the top left: (A ) the original raw backscatter
data mosaic; (B) the statically norm alized SonarScope backscatter
data mosaic; (C) the statically normalized GLOBE backscatter
data mosaic; and (D) the dynamically normalized backscatter
mosaic. The dynamically norm alized backscatter mosaic
improves readability and shows fewer angular variations
across the track than the s tatically normalized ones
(Figure 9B,C ) while preserving natural variations in the
seaﬂoor BS. Some incidence angle artifacts can also be seen on
the two pockmarks (red arrows) located in the upper left and
lower right corners of the SonarScope mosaic ( Figure 9B ): the
side facing the sonar array appears brighter, while it is
homogeneous on both mosaics processed by GLOBE. The
GLOBE normalization algorithm effectively separates the
variable gains of the array ’sr e l a t i v eb e a ma n g l ef r o mt h e
variable backscatter of the sea ﬂoor incidence angle, ensuring
more accurate and consist ent processing results.
4 Discussion and future work
4.1 Signi ﬁcance of GLOBE for
scientiﬁc studies
GLOBE allows researchers to process and scrutinize at sea the
acoustic data collected from di fferent sensors. By providing
open-source software with operational graphical interfaces
capable of handling large data sets produced by modern
acoustic sensors, GLOBE signi ﬁcantly increases the
possibilities of getting the most out of these data during or
after cruises. This software, launched at the beginning of 2012,
has evolved over the last 10 years and is now the of ﬁcial
bathymetric processing software used by most FOF campaigns.
Its water column and seabed backscatter processing module has
been adopted by a large community of users, making it an
essential tool for detecting gas seepage during geoscience
surveys ( Scalabrin and Dupre, 2018 ). The water column
display, as either a 3D or a 2D stack, has been proven useful
for several applications like seep gas detection and localization
(Dupré et al., 2015 ; Mitchell et al., 2022 ; Urban et al., 2017 )a n d
habitat mapping ( Lucieer et al., 2023 ).
Due to its extensive use within the EMODnet Bathymetry
initiative ( S c h m i t te ta l . ,2 0 1 9), spanning over 24 European
countries, GLOBE has also gained recognition within a wider
international community, highlighting its widespread use for
several years. This is supporte d by download statistics that
show that GLOBE was downloaded more than 1,000 times
across more than 50 countries in 2024, though these numbers
should be interpreted with cauti on as this number shows the total
number of downloads but no t necessarily the number of
total users.
At the same time, GLOBE was able to quickly open up to other
acoustic scienti ﬁc communities, allowing the display of other
Frontiers in Remote Sensing frontiersin.org13
Poncelet et al. 10.3389/frsen.2025.1574129acoustic echo sounder data, such as quantitative echo sounders or
ADCP. The Kongsberg EK80 acquisition software, which handles
both quantitative single-beam echo sounders and ADCPs, has
recently added native export to the latest SONAR-netCDF4
format, which will make the integration process into the GLOBE
software even easier.
Thanks to its broad data import capacity (all sensor data
acquired on the FOF and any CSV-like data), GLOBE allows for
easy comparison of large-scale water column acoustic datasets with
more localized georeferenced in situ measurements from physico-
chemical sensors installed on a ship hull, an AUV/USV/glider, or a
CTD, thus contributing to the constitution of a comprehensive 3D
picture of the ocean environment. Geoscientists can also easily
import and visualize sub-bottom pro ﬁles acquired from hull-
mounted low-frequency echo sounders or seismic equipment, as
well as gravimetric and magnetometric data processed by GLOBE.
4.2 Contributions to the backscatter
working group community
The applications of seaﬂoor backscatter data are expanding. One
of the conclusions of the Sea ﬂoor Backscatter Intercomparison
project from the Backscatter working group community ( Malik
et al., 2019 ) was that either an increased consistency among
various software packages or at least a clear explanation for
differences among software solutions is necessary. By delivering
an open-source software package implementing a work ﬂow close to
the standard pipeline and nomenclature proposed by Schimel et al.
(2018) as aimed by the OpenBST project ( Masetti et al., 2020 ),
GLOBE backscatter processing modules can be a signi ﬁcant step
forward for the community and a proposal for a reference
implementation for backscatter processing.
Key decisions were made and documented during development,
such as how backscatter values are read from ﬁles (BL
0) and how
insoniﬁed areas are considered (BL 2). Future work will focus on
incorporating multibeam backscatter calibration tools and
techniques ( Eleftherakis et al., 2018 ), leading to an estimation of
BL
3. The open-source nature of these algorithms and their
accessibility via the Python language allow for experimentations
and modiﬁcations to assess the impact of various factors mentioned
by Malik et al. (2019) , such as the choice of central tendency, the
selection of the backscatter samples, and the calculation methods.
The intermediate processing results are available and can be
easily accessed at any step with the ability to add custom exports.
This approach provides researchers with a tool that enhances the
accuracy, consistency, and clarity regarding differences with other
software, thereby advancing the standardization of backscatter
processing. These efforts align with recommendations from
Lurton et al. (2015) and Malik et al. (2019) and in continuation
to the work presented by Masetti et al. (2020) .
The backscatter processing algorithm offers users a choice
between static and dynamic methods for removing angular
sensitivity in MBES data, depending on the processing objectives.
The dynamic method is ideal for scientists seeking a sea ﬂoor
backscatter image free from artifacts caused by angular variations
in the transducer and seaﬂoor response. This processed image serves
as a baseline map for further segmentation methods. Backscatter
(BS) reference levels are automatically computed in this method,
allowing the algorithm to adapt to sea ﬂoor variations without
requiring additional expertise. However, the selection of the
sliding window size is crucial: if it is too short, the BS natural
variation may be lost, and if it is too long, the method resembles the
static approach, negating the bene ﬁts of adaptability. The static
method is bene ﬁcial for detailed sea ﬂoor analysis using backscatter
curves and for processing data with localized sea ﬂoor variations. It
consumes less memory and time. Additionally, the static method
serves as a foundation for developing processing chains aimed at
echo sounder calibration to achieve an absolute BS response
(Eleftherakis et al., 2018 ).
The use of calibrated data and absolute backscatter response is
essential to the community for ensuring greater objectivity and
reproducibility. Standardizing the data enables results that are
independent of the speci ﬁc vessels, sonar models, equipment
conﬁgurations, and environmental conditions when using echo
sounders operating at the same acoustic frequency. Calibrating
multifrequency echo sounders allowing spectral analysis of
seaﬂoor backscatter will be a step forward and will give new
insights into the remote monitoring of the geoacoustic properties
of the sea ﬂoor ( Fezzani et al., 2021 ).
4.3 Perspectives and future work
The software is under continuous and active development. New
functionalities are frequently added to meet further research
requirements, and the source code is regularly improved to
accelerate work ﬂows and handle datasets of increasing size. In
the near future, in addition to the development for absolute
backscatter response of the sea ﬂoor, planned improvements of
GLOBE include enhanced compatibility with the SONAR-
netCDF4 format, like expansion of the software ’s water column
visualization capabilities to support a broader range of sonar
equations and sounder ping modes.
In recent years, the volume of data produced by sensors has
increased with new capacities and with an increasing number of
sensors on research vessels. GLO BE adapted its architecture to
make a clear separation between the graphical interface and its
process. This led to building a process framework and library that
can be used interactively in GLOBE or in batch mode to process
datasets. This framework is sh a r e da n du s e di no t h e rp r o j e c t s
within the FOF software ecosystem to deploy solutions for
automated processing on the ﬂeet ships, with the target to
optimize and accelerat e processing scienti ﬁcw o r k ﬂows but
also to be used to monitor and im prove data acquisitions from
the shore, as it is already needed in the unmanned surface vehicle
(USV) use case ( Handegard et al., 2024 ).
GLOBE is available for download on the Seanoe website ( www.
seanoe.org) at this address https://doi.org/10.17882/70460
Data availability statement
Publicly available datasets were analyzed in this study. These
data can be found at https://doi.org/10.17600/18003780 and https://
bswg.github.io/bsip/.
Frontiers in Remote Sensing frontiersin.org14
Poncelet et al. 10.3389/frsen.2025.1574129Author contributions
CP: conceptualization, project administration, software,
supervision, visualization, writing – original draft,
writing – review and editing, and validation. AS:
conceptualization, methodol ogy, software, validation,
visualization, writing – original draft, and writing – review
and editing. AG: data curation, methodology, validation,
visualization, writing – original draft, and writing – review
and editing. GB: conceptualizat ion, software, visualization,
writing – original draft, writing – review and editing, and
validation. LB: project administration, supervision,
writing – original draft, writing – review and editing, and
validation.
Funding
T h ea u t h o r ( s )d e c l a r et h a t ﬁnancial support was
received for the research and/or publication of this article.
The development of the GLOBE software is funded by
Ifremer and the French Oceanographic Fleet (FOF).
EMODnet bathymetry-related development had been
funded by the European Commission under contract
number EASME/EMFF/2019/1.3.1.9/Lot1/SI2.836043: Lot
1 – Bathymetry.
Conﬂict of interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be
construed as a potential con ﬂict of interest.
Correction note
A correction has been made to this article. Details can be found
at: 10.3389/frsen.2025.1703531.
Generative AI statement
The author(s) declare that no Generative AI was used in the
creation of this manuscript.
Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and
do not necessarily represent those of their af ﬁliated organizations, or
those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that
may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its
manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.
References
Arnaubec, A., Ferrera, M., Escartín, J., Matabos, M., Gracias, N., and Opderbecke, J.
(2023). Underwater 3D reconstruction from video or still imagery: Matisse and
3DMetrics processing and exploitation software. J. Mar. Sci. Eng. 11, 985. doi:10.
3390/jmse11050985
Backscatter Working Group (BSWG) (2025). GeoHab-Marine Geological and
Biological Habitat Mapping . Ontario, Canada: GeoHab. Available online at: https://
geohab.org/backscatter-working-group/ (Accessed 13 June, 2025).
D u p r é ,S . ,S c a l a b r i n ,C . ,G r a l l ,C . ,A u g u s t i n ,J . - M . ,H e n r y ,P . ,Şengör, A. M. C.,
et al. (2015). Tectonic and sedimentary controls on widespread gas emissions in the
Sea of Marmara: results from systematic, s hipborne multibeam echo sounder water
column imaging. J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth 120, 2891 –2912. doi:10.1002/
2014JB011617
Eleftherakis, D., Berger, L., Le Bouffant, N., Pacault, A., Augustin, J.-M., and Lurton,
X. (2018). Backscatter calibration of high-frequency multibeam echosounder using a
reference single-beam system, on natural sea ﬂoor. Mar. Geophys. Res. 39, 55–73. doi:10.
1007/s11001-018-9348-5
Escartin, J., Birard, T., Borremans, C. , Fezzani, R., Durand, V., Feld, A., et al.
(2024). UlyXDemo ’24 test cruise. (Preliminary report No. v. 2024/07/04) . Louisville,
CO: Aechimer. Available online at: https://archimer.ifremer.fr/doc/00898/
100967/.
Fezzani, R., Berger, L., Le Bouffant, N., Fonseca, L., and Lurton, X. (2021).
Multispectral and multiangle measurements of acoustic seabed backscatter acquired
with a tilted calibrated echosounder. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 149, 4503–4515. doi:10.1121/10.
0005428
Hammerstad, E. (2000). Backscattering and seabed image re ﬂectivity. Available online
at: https://www.kongsberg.com/globalassets/kongsberg-discovery/commerce/sea ﬂoor-
mapping/em2040-mkii/em_technical_note_web_backscatteringseabedimagereﬂectivity.
pdf (Accessed 10 January, 2025).
Handegard, N. O., De Robertis, A., Holmin, A. J., Johnsen, E., Lawrence, J., Le
Bouffant, N., et al. (2024). Uncrewed surface vehicles (USVs) as platforms for ﬁsheries
and plankton acoustics. ICES. J. Mar. Sci. 81, 1712 –1723. doi:10.1093/icesjms/fsae130
Korneliussen, R., Ona, E., Eliassen, I., Heggelund, Y., Patel, R., Godø, O., et al. (2006).
The large scale survey system-LSSS. In: Proceedings of the 29th scandinavian symposium
on physical acoustics . Bergen, Norway: Institute of Marine Research.
Ladroit, Y., Escobar-Flores, P. C., Schimel, A. C. G., and O’Driscoll, R. L. (2020). ESP3:
an open-source software for the quantitative processing of hydro-acoustic data.
SoftwareX 12, 100581. doi:10.1016/j.softx.2020.100581
Lee, W.-J., Setiawan, L., Tuguinay, C., Mayorga, E., and Staneva, V. (2024).
Interoperable and scalable echosounder data processing with Echopype. ICES
J. Mar. Sci. 81, 1941 –1951. doi:10.1093/icesjms/fsae133
Le Gal, L., and Edy, C. (1997). CARAIBES: an integrated software for multibeam
echosounder and sidescan sonar data mapping. In: MTS/IEEE conference proceedings ;
1997 October 06 –09; Halifax, NS, Canada: IEEE, 1242 –1245. doi:10.1109/OCEANS.
1997.624173
Lucieer, V., Flukes, E., Keane, J. P., Ling, S. D., Nau, A. W., and Shelamoff, V. (2023).
Mapping warming reefs —an application of multibeam acoustic water column analysis
to de ﬁne threatened abalone habitat. Front. Remote Sens. 4. doi:10.3389/frsen.2023.
1149900
Lurton, X., Lamarche, G., Brown, C., Lucieer, V., Rice, G., Schimel, A., et al. (2015).
Backscatter measurements by sea ﬂoor-mapping sonars. In: Guidelines and
recommendations. Ontario, Canada: GeoHab. doi:10.5281/zenodo.10089261
Macaulay, G., and Peña, H. (2018). The SONAR-netCDF4 convention for sonar data,
Version 1.0. Copenhagen, Denmark: ICES Cooperative Research Report. doi:10.17895/
ICES.PUB.4392
M a l i k ,M . ,S c h i m e l ,A .C .G . ,M a s e t t i ,G . ,R o c h e ,M . ,L eD e u n f ,J . ,D o l a n ,M .F .J . ,
et al. (2019). Results from the ﬁrst phase of the sea ﬂoor backscatter processing
software inter-comparison project. Geosciences 9, 516. doi:10.3390/
geosciences9120516
Masetti, G., Smith, M., Mayer, L., Malik, M., Augustin, J. M., Poncelet, C., et al.
(2020). OpenBST Project –A community-vetted work ﬂow for backscatter processing .
In: Canadian Hydrographic Conference 2020; 2020 February 25 –27. Québec,
Canada: Canadian Hydrograp hic Association. Available online at: https://www.
slideshare.net/slideshow /open-backscatter-toolchain-openbst-project-a-
communityvetted-work ﬂow-for-backscatter-proces sing/229396305 (Accessed
23 January, 2025) .
Mitchell, G. A., Mayer, L. A., and Gharib, J. J. (2022). Bubble vent localization for
marine hydrocarbon seep surveys. Interpretation 10, SB107 –SB128. doi:10.1190/INT-
2021-0084.1
Perret, T., Le Chenadec, G., Gaillot, A., Ladroit, Y., and Dupré, S. (2025). Deep-
learning-based detection of underwater ﬂuids in multiple multibeam echosounder data.
Front. Remote Sens. 6. doi:10.3389/frsen.2025.1532714
Perrot, Y., Brehmer, P., Habasque, J., Roudaut, G., Behagle, N., Sarré, A., et al. (2018).
Matecho: an open-source tool for processing ﬁsheries acoustics data. Acoust. Aust. 46,
241–248. doi:10.1007/s40857-018-0135-x
Frontiers in Remote Sensing frontiersin.org15
Poncelet et al. 10.3389/frsen.2025.1574129Rovere, M., Mercorella, A., Gamberi, F., and Zgur, F. (2022). Hydrothermal vent
complexes control seepage and hydrocarbon release on the overriding plate of the
tyrrhenian-ionian subduction system (paola basin). Front. Earth Sci. 10, 852786. doi:10.
3389/feart.2022.852786
Scalabrin, C., and Dupre, S. (2018). Water column acoustics: remote detection of gas
seeps. In: L. Ruf ﬁne, D. Broseta, and A. Desmedt, editors Gas hydrates 2: geoscience
issues and potential industrial applications . London, UK: ISTE Ltd. p. 11 –20. doi:10.
1002/9781119451174.ch1
Schimel, A., Ladroit, Y., and Watson, S. (2024). Espresso: an open-source software tool
for visualizing and analysing multibeam water-column data . Vienna, Austria: EGU
General Assembly. doi:10.5194/egusphere-egu24-11043
Schimel, A. C. G., Beaudoin, J., Parnum, I. M., Le Bas, T., Schmidt, V., Keith, G., et al.
(2018). Multibeam sonar backscatter data processing. Mar. Geophys. Res. 39, 121–137.
doi:10.1007/s11001-018-9341-z
Schmitt, T., Spoelstra, G., Loubrieu, B., and Poncelet, C. (2019). “EMODnet
Bathymetry a compilation of bathymetric data in the European waters. In:
OCEANS 2019 –marseille; 2019 June 17 –20; Marseille, France. Marseille, France:
IEEE, 1 –7. doi:10.1109/OCEANSE.2019.8867250
Trenkel, V. M., Berger, L., Bourguignon, S., Doray, M., Fablet, R., Massé, J., et al.
(2009). Overview of recent progress in ﬁsheries acoustics made by Ifremer with
examples from the Bay of Biscay. Aquat. Living Resour. 22, 433 –445. doi:10.1051/
alr/2009027
Urban, P., Köser, K., and Greinert, J. (2017). Processing of multibeam water
column image data for automated bubble/seep detection and repeated mapping.
Limnol. Oceanogr. Methods 15, 1 –21. doi:10.1002/lom3.10138
Wall, C. C., Towler, R., Anderson, C., Cutter, R., and Jech, J. M. (2018). PyEcholab: an
open-source, python-based toolkit to analyze water-column echosounder data.
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 144, 1778. doi:10.1121/1.5067860
Frontiers in Remote Sensing frontiersin.org16
Poncelet et al. 10.3389/frsen.2025.1574129